This is an interview with Ms. Rocio Powell by
Carrie Weber on April 12, 1976, for an oral history
project in Geography 311.
We came to Texas in 19 and 29 from Tennessee. My
husband worked for the railroad. We came knowing
the opportunities would be better here. We lived
in Kaufman, TX about 18 months. We came to Groves
back. And live there two years. We came to her and in
34 her and was slow for progress a while. We had two
schools, elementary and high World War Two came
on. I had two boys to go in the Navy. They were in the
invasion on Guana Canal and Imajima. We were gone.
They were gone three years. Come home safe. We have
a new post office now. Used to have one on the old
building on the corner of 4th. We have. very few
side, we had very few sidewalks. What we had were
brick. We had a cotton mill, an oil mill, which are
gone now. Very few people had cars. They were Model
Ts, and now most everybody has a nice car. Our
school system has improved so much. The children
would go, would come to school at 8 o'clock, get out
at 4, They that lived any distance would bring
their lunch. We had no hospitals, had one doctor
named Alexander. He died years ago. After the war,
Dr. Searcy and Dr. Fleming built a little
hospital. Dr. Searcy died, Dr. Boyd and Dr. Gwines
built the big hospital which we have now, and we are
very proud. We lived On Market Street, we had a
bench in the corner of our yard. A&M boys would come
and sit on that bench waiting for a ride. That was in
1940, 42, and 43. I have seen A&M go into a
university. Someday, A&M will be the biggest
college anywhere. I sent my grandson, John
Pastor, to A&M, which graduated in 75 and is now in
law school. I am an A&M fan.
I can go back to when you were in Tennessee. You
taught school there, right? Well, I taught school
in Tennessee. I went to college in Murfreesboro,
Tennessee. in 1910, 1911, and 1912. And it was
strictly a teacher's college. And I majored in
English and Home Ec. And today, it's like A&M. Any
field you want to get into to go to teacher's
college, why, you can get into it, for it covers all
I have one of my friends sent me a picture of it last
year and it's a big college now. But when I went
there and then I taught school about six months.
And then I quit and then we we came to Texas and but I
never did teach school here, but I always belong to
the PTA. And I have had children in school ever
since 19 and 20. And this year, Karen will graduate
from high school here. And I won't have nobody else
in school. Of course, I guess she'll go to college
somewhere, which John wants her to go to A&M. I
don't know where she'll go. Did you come from a
large family? Me? No. I had one brother. and one
sister and my brother's dead i am the only one
that's living in my family and i'm 84 years old your
husband was with the railroad right and my husband
died in 1970 and all his family is gone in fact my
children is about all i've got in the relation in
the relative part and uh No, they're all gone. All
my children, I have five girls and three boys, and
they're all living. Well, what was the main
industry in Hearn? What was the main industry in
Hearn when you all got here? Cotton, railroading,
cotton mill and oil mill. Was it wells? I mean, for
the oil. Was it wells or what? No, the oil. See, they
had the cotton mill. They'd take the cotton seed
and stuff and make oil. And it's all closed up now.
And then we had the Humboldt and the Texaco people,
you know these tanks you see out here? Well, they
used to have gasoline and oil in them, and now
there's nothing. When did they come in? Oh, honey,
I just don't know when they did, because they're
here when I come here. But they've been closed for.
Oh, I guess 25 years. That's one reason that Hearn
is not. We don't have the best school system in the
world, and that's why we don't have any money. You
know, it's got a town has got to be prosperous for
money to pay teachers and we have to have what you
call the. Where they can't get a job nowhere else
because they don't have the money to pay them. But
we've got no income. But nothing to bring their
money in. Nothing where taxes would be. Now
railroading. I've seen the day when they would be a
whole block when they'd get their checks going to
the bank. Now there's 15 or 20 going. And of course
that brought a resource in for schools. and uh as
well as a hern has never let nothing come in here and
they didn't couldn't realize what they're
cutting their nose off to spite the face by not
doing it and you know that the factory over in brian
that i believe is baker shoe factories well they
wanted here and the city manager wouldn't let them
come here and they went over there and they built
When they went there, they just had one little
place there on the corner. Well, now they have a
whole, you know how much, how big it is. That's why
Brian, I have seen Brian grow. They used to,
between Brian and College Station, that was all
woods.
And you see where he is now, don't you? Because
that's why Brian is worth so much. And it's
prospered because they have let stuff come in.
They have built and hung just a town that won't
build or won't let business come in. They're not
going to get nowhere. That's true. And that's the
way it is here. They just never would let nothing go
here. Used to, I can remember A&M how it used to be.
that we used to have trains to run through we'd ride
on you know the agriculture part was over on this
side and the mechanical part was over on that side
is the old building still over there the
agriculture part i'm not sure which one are you
referring to i imagine it is i haven't been on that
side and i don't know when but every that's the way
it used to be that and now who has grown and still are
growing even now john of course finished in three
years at a m because he went all the time and in that
three years how it has how a m has built and still a
building in growing and i remember when uh they let
girls start oh they had a woog they didn't and the
boys didn't want the girls to come and a lot of the
people didn't say it was boys college and let's
keep it that way but i never could understand why
they didn't want it because the girls had the same
right to go that the boys did and now why you know
where it is with them they have a well i think that uh
I think our school system is better all the way
around than it used to be, but it used to be we didn't
have nothing to do nothing with. That was one
thing. And then another thing, used to nobody, the
majority of children that went to school, their
parents had money. And now, if you want an
education, money's not the object. Because
there'll be some way for you to go. If you want an
education now, it's up to you. Because you can get
the means to go on. Do you think Hearn needs more
education, I mean a better education system, more
schools? think what you think is her not to improve
their schools well they would if they could but
they can't they've got nothing to do nothing with
it takes money takes money to do things our
teachers here well i don't know hardly how they
live but of course this is not a such a this is just a
country town life because they don't make much But
then they're glad we've got a very few teachers
that has two degrees. Well, you know now most any
school, any town, well, they're going to require
that teacher to have two degrees anyhow. Well, we
have teachers here that don't even have a degree
that substitute teachers. Well, a lot of the
parents kick about it. But what you going to do?
They haven't got money to hire teachers with to
hire extra teachers. They're sub teachers. We
have a girl. She's got five children. And she's
going to A&M now. And she substitutes here
sometimes. She hasn't been to A&M a year. And some
of the parents are just kicking the wall out about
it. You know, don't want her to teach said she
wasn't qualified well she just teaches the low
grades she uh one out of high school could teach a
low grade child in the first grade or kindergarten
or something well i've just been ripped down the
back because i said we can't get nobody else and i
said let her teach and let her keep on going to a m and
no we our school system is not the best and that's
why it's money we don't have income to pay teachers
you know you got to have uh you take brian every way
you turn around now there's something that makes
that is taxed to make money for the schools for a
certain part of all of it goes to the school It's
just like with paying anything else. We only have
one highway patrolman here. Of course, he is paid
by the county, but the city has to pay him so much,
too. But they don't have no money. Poor, poor pay.
We can get a good policeman here, come in here, and
next thing you know, he's either gone to Byron or to
Houston or Temple or somewhere. More money?
Because they just don't have their money to do
with. It takes money to do most anything that's
where you're going to accomplish something.
You're going to have to have money. It's going to
have to come from somewhere. But let it be honest,
we're losing a bank here now.
We've had lots of trouble with it. I don't know.
Well, do you think that Hearn did better when they
had the cotton mills around? Oh, sure. Anytime
with anything, you take like the railroad. My
husband was yard foreman. And up until about He
retired in 65.
And up until about 60, he worked from 18 to 20 men.
And when he quit, he had to retire on account of his
health. And then he was working 8 of 10, and now they
work 4.
And you see all of that. They moved off to different
places. Some of them, when they'd get cut off, they
were younger men. They'd go somewhere else where
they could get on. Well, the next day he'd work
three, and maybe this man would have eight or nine
children. Well, a lot of times I would fix up a big
pan of meal, great big pieces of meat and dried
beans and send out To that family.
To what you had to. You didn't want him to cry for
something to eat. And as to us, we had plenty to eat,
a good house to live in, a car to drive and
everything like that. But the man that was a
working. Why it made it hard on him because he
helped somebody else. Especially if like we wash
daddy worked there with me and. And you become
attached to the crew that you're working. And we
just, of course, some of them, they had some men
that were single. Well, there's all right what
they drew. But you take a man, and especially way
back then, it seemed like that the black
especially, we had one man that had 11 children.
And I couldn't see those children cry for hunger.
And, of course, that made it hard then on me. And, of
course, now people won't call it a depression. But
I don't know what else harder that we are in.
People, of course, I do think, though, that
people, that times is getting a little bit better.
It seems like there's more work for people than
there was. For I know about two years ago. There
wasn't work for nobody and everything high.
Well, I think. That if we can ever get the
government straightened out.
Why I think times will get better. And I think it's
up to the people. You know this sitting back and
saying now. I don't know why in the world that we
don't get a so-and-so, a good governor, a good
president, a good so-and-so in Congress, or do
this or do that. We'll have to get up and do
something about it. I don't know. They don't do it,
though. That's true. Do you remember what the
wages were like? What kind of wages the railroad
was paying back then? Oh, my gracious.
In 1930, in
Grovesburg, people worked for 50 cents a day. Not
on the railroad. I think the railroad men made
about, of course, daddy was on salary. But then, I
believe then his salary was $150 a month. But you
could take $10 and go to the grocery store and buy
enough groceries to last a month. And when he quit,
he was making close to $1,000 a month. Now, that's
the way it had to come up. But you could get a job
today of making $20 a day. And you could work five
days at $20. You go to buy something, they know what
you're making. As salary and wages go up, stuff's
going to go up. So they're going to get your money.
That's just the way the ball bounces. It's always
been that way, more or less. Especially in recent
years, it's been more so. We had... I had my
children far apart, but last I had four girls, and
the grown ones called them the little girls, and my
baby will be 45 years old in September. I used to go
to town, and I'd buy them pair of shoes for $1.98.
They were shoes, too, like you buy now and give $18,
$20 for it. Well, then the dollar was worth more in
those days, though, wasn't it? Karen bought her
pair of shoes in Lubbock. They got a sole on them and
a strap and gave $20 for them.
Well, did you ever have a job other than teaching?
What? Did you ever have a job other than teaching?
No. I was in college when I married. And I kept
house.
My baby boy graduated from Sam Houston. And one day
they were talking in class. And this professor
asked the children what their parents did. And
they come to Jack and said, Jack, does your mother
work? He said, my mother's got the most important
job there is in the world. jacks he he was deciding
he said that some of them turned around and looked
he said what does your mother do he said she is a wife
and my mother
well if you think about it to be a mother it's not
everybody that has a baby is a mother i know plenty
of people that They've got three or four children,
but they're getting short. With being like this
should be. And if you are a mother of Christian
mother and raise children and educator. Why
you've helped the world, you've helped. The
progress of time for that boy girl. Maybe. All
right, you take it this way. My baby boy. Has three
degrees. He has BS degree in master. From Sam
Houston and then he has PH degree which he got. He
went to about five different colleges. And he. Is
over special in education for delinquent boys and
girls and retardation. He places retarded
children in. Two homes where their parents can't
take care of him properly. He has a good job.
Well, since he has so much, I mean, has some
experience in teaching, do you think that the
educational process, I mean, how they teach
children has changed much? Oh, mercy, yes, and
much better. But let's take the retaliation. Used
to, if anybody had a retarded child, that child was
kept at home. and a lot of people didn't ever even
see that child because so many parents i guess they
felt embarrassed that's my notion but now
retarded children has a chance now just like with
jack he goes into homes these children are in our
schools here we have a teacher that teaches
retarded children And used to, I know one,
especially I have a friend that has a girl
retarded. Well, she started that child to school.
She's as old as Karen. And, of course, you can tell
she's retarded all right enough. But a long time
ago, when that child started to school, she
couldn't have talk. She didn't know anything. Her
mother had never taught her nothing. And now she
can read and write, and she's a nice-looking girl.
Now, and she goes to church regularly. You don't
ever see her talking to anybody. I don't walk up to
her and I say, Mel Ballou, how are you doing? Fine.
Oh, yes, education has improved. Wonderful.
Wonderful.
Y'all ever had any racial problems you heard? Oh,
yes. When they first started to integrate here,
some of the whites, and after it done been law and
everything, they wasn't going to let them go. And
of course, I always belonged to the PTA. And when
this day school started, used to mothers would go.
Well, John was in the sixth grade. And that morning
when we got to school, they'd hired a colored
teacher. Oh, here comes some of them because I was
the oldest mother or grandmother. We're not going
to have her. Our children, we're going to do this
and we're going to do that. I said, let me tell you
something right now. You're up against a brick
wall. I said, we sat in the saddle. We didn't think
it would come. I didn't. They didn't. And I said,
it's come, and you better go home and keep your
mouth shut. Well, I'm going to teach my child that
first thing she says, pick up a rock and hit her. I
said, you are headed for trouble. When I got home, I
said, John, you sit down. We're going to have a
little roundtable discussion. He sat down. I
said... Ms. Robinson was her name, and she's crazy
about John now. I said, you say yes ma'am and no
ma'am to her, and if ever any trouble, you come and
tell me, I'll settle it. Wasn't no time till John
was crazy about her, and she's crazy about John.
But oh, she had it rough for a while.
They fought, the black and the white fought,
They'd done everything you could think of doing,
but John never was in it. He had better not ever been
in it either. We had it. We didn't have to have it.
But people said, oh, that won't ever come. The
black and white won't ever mix. Well, after it was
passed, what are you going to do? There was nothing
you could do. And she was a good teacher. Is she
still teaching? No, she retired. She has a nice
brick home over here. Oh my goodness, I can see her.
She'll see Karen. She wants to know how John is.